Greetings
to all esteemed fellow practitioners and friends!
Our ancestors used to say, "Buying a house,
getting married, and building a
home—these three things are truly difficult." The act of
building a house is a source of great anxiety for
many people.
Almost everyone who builds a house worries about it, fearing misfortune and bad luck that might
befall them and their
families.
This fear
stems from the fact that
many
people, after building a house,
experience numerous
health and longevity problems. Sometimes,
during or within
three years of building a house,
they suffer
serious illnesses, accidents,
business decline, and
family conflicts and
discord. In other words, many
things happen based on reality,
not just
personal opinions.  That reality is
clearly evident. Therefore, fear and anxiety are justified, dear fellow
practitioners. From that anxiety,
people have found many ways to
mitigate
this problem. Today, Tam Cheo Ha Quan would like to answer
a question related to this issue.
Because
when we Buddhists were not yet Buddhists,
we used many
folk methods, methods that our ancestors used to do.
But now that we
follow Buddhism,
we don't apply those
methods we used before. So
how do we do it now? This is a concern
sent to Tam Cheo Quan
today. Tam Cheo Quan would like to answer. Please read the
question: "Greetings, Auntie. I
understand that folk beliefs hold that when building a
new house, the homeowner often encounters bad luck,
called 'house-building misfortune,'
such as declining health, financial ruin,
family discord, marital breakdown, and
even serious accidents
leading to death.
I also want to build a house in a few years because my parents..."  I have already
given my land to someone. From a Buddhist perspective, as a
Buddhist, what should I do to
avoid
these misfortunes when building a house? I would appreciate your guidance, thank
you.
Dear fellow
practitioners, before
we embraced Buddhism,
we used to
borrow someone else's age for building a house if it wasn't auspicious. That is, we
borrowed someone else's age that was
compatible with the house's orientation. But
now, as Buddhists, we do
n't borrow
anymore. Instead, we
go to a feng shui master
to
see which direction is suitable for
our house. For example, if it's a subdivided plot of land, we
can't find a
suitable direction, or if our land has
certain standards,
or if we're displaced due to relocation,
we can't find a suitable direction, so we have to
borrow someone else's age to make
it compatible with the house's
orientation and then redeem it later. But
now, following Buddhism, we don't do that
anymore. Why?  If you don't do it now, I
'll explain it
later. Then
there are things, for example, if
you buy land that used to be
a cemetery that was relocated,
you have to check very carefully
and hire a spiritual master to perform a ritual.
Or if you buy land from the previous owner, they even have to
go to the previous owner's house. They say they
have to invite all the spirits
before they can build their house
there.
All these things
stem from the
reality that people build houses and encounter
very
unexpected things. At the Tam Chieu temple,
many Buddhists have come to
talk about things like, for example,
after buying and building a house here, their
children, who were normal,
suddenly become depressed, or in
some cases, their minds
become abnormal, what people
call starting to have mental problems. There are
many Buddhists like that.  Many people came to ask, and there were also many
cases where people came to ask, saying that after
building a house, their business
always encountered obstacles and
misfortunes that caused them to
lose
money. Then, the monk Han Quan
asked the fellow practitioners, "Before building
this house, did you go to see a fortune teller or perform any rituals?"
Everyone answered that they did.
No one builds a house
carelessly;
everyone sees the situation, performs rituals, and offers
prayers. Building a house has
always been done carelessly by our ancestors.
Even when buying a house, you
still have to see the situation, invite a fortune teller to perform rituals, and offer prayers.
So the question is, some
people consult a fortune teller, and
some don't experience problems
after building their house, and everything remains peaceful. But
the majority consult that fortune teller, and even though
that fortune teller
performs rituals, they still experience
problems. We must ask ourselves, "Is
there no one in the whole world who can do it without a fortune teller?"  Building a
house without consulting a fortune teller: If you haven't yet learned about
Buddhism and practiced it genuinely,
you'll understand that whatever religion you follow, you
'll perform rituals according to
that religion and belief system. When you go to a fortune teller or a
teacher of
that religion, they'll tell you to
do this or that to prevent problems from
happening, but in the end, problems still occur. It might only be
20 minutes before it happens, but
usually, after building a house, it takes 80 minutes for
one thing to happen, or another.
Even with all the rituals performed, it's still very
complete.
So,
how does Buddhism explain this, and
how should one proceed when building a house according to Buddhist principles? To solve this
problem, dear Buddhist followers,
there is a
Buddhist perspective: the truth of all
matters. The Buddha is a true and insightful being. The
Buddha understands why
problems often occur after building a house; he sees the truth and
knows the truth.  It's just like when
the mind of Han Guan sees
this document here, and he knows the
truth: it's rectangular, and he knows it's
true.
He sees clearly with his own eyes what the writing on it is, which is called "seeing with one's own eyes."
Similarly, the Buddha
explains all things in this world
with their true nature.
Our Buddha is the one who understands the world, meaning
he sees and knows all things in this world
with their true nature. So, regarding the
truth about building a house, why do we often
encounter such problems? From a
Buddhist perspective, what is it?
Dear fellow practitioners, what is the Buddhist perspective? Merit
and karma. Merit
is the crystallization of good deeds: filial piety, righteousness, giving,
charity, helping, forgiving, loving, empathizing – all actions stemming from that heart are called good deeds and they generate merit to protect us. And what is karma? Karma
is everything that
originates from...  Our unwholesome minds—
selfish, ungrateful,
disloyal, and harmful to living beings
—all those actions will
later lead to obstacles when
we desire something.
This is called karmic obstruction. Karma is the
result of actions that create obstacles; it creates
the
causes and conditions that hinder our desires. So, how do blessings and
karma relate to building a
house? Why do we often encounter karmic obstruction
after building a house?
Where does this karmic obstruction come from?
Dear fellow
practitioners, when we build a house, we use
our own money, right?
We use our own money. We borrow money,
our parents give us money,
anyone who gives us money
also gives us money. So we use
our own money to build a house and
enjoy it. Why then does karmic obstruction
hinder all our endeavors?
Because after building the house...
What are these things we
feel here, what we call declining health, are
also considered obstacles to
our well-being, aren't they?
Declining health means our health is
being hindered. If business
declines, it means our business
is being harmed, right? If
our marriage and family happiness are
disrupted, it's
called a marriage being
hindered. Then, the money we
use to build a house to live in is considered a
blessing, so we enjoy our blessings.
How can
we be hindered by anything?
That's a question in Buddhism.
Dear fellow practitioners, it's like this:
Our money comes from the
blessings we accumulate. When we accumulate these blessings,
we
enjoy them, and when we
use them to build a
house,
we ourselves must have blessings to
have good health.  In this house,
we must focus entirely on
this house, and there must be
another kind of blessing for us to enjoy. To enjoy happiness in
this house,
what does happiness consist of? It consists of work and business. If work and
business are not going well, there is
no happiness.
If husband and wife are not harmonious, there is no happiness. If children are not obedient, not well-behaved, not doing well in school, and not having a
good career, then nothing is
not going well. Here, the mind observes... Let me give you
an example to help you understand:
If a person
has enough money to
build a house, for example,
500,000 dong,
but they
don't have to borrow or beg,
meaning they don't have to pay interest later, they don't have to
beg.
That means they don't owe anyone anything.  A house that
cost 500,000 VND to build, but someone with 1 million VND
doesn't
encounter much trouble, not
much at all. But the person who
has this house, which originally cost
500,000 VND to build, received money from parents, siblings, and
friends, and then borrowed to cover the
500,000 VND needed to build the house. After
building the house,
they calculate that it
will take them 2, 3, or 4 years to pay it back.
Building a house is always like that. So, in
this case, they often encounter
more difficulties, dear fellow practitioners. Let me explain with a mental exercise: for
example, if you
want to travel, you need to
prepare money for airfare, food, shopping, and other
expenses during the trip,
right? But if you can only
afford the airfare, and
you fly to the other side,
during your time there, you might
encounter difficulties, right? You might not have any problems.
I don't have money for food, I don't have money to
rent a hotel, meaning I have nothing.
So, if I encounter obstacles in everything, it's the same. If my remaining merit is
only enough to build a house, meaning
I earn money during that process,
then my
parents give me this much, and
people lend me this much.
Then I pour all my merit into building the
house, and the rest I have to
work to pay off the debt. And what about people who give
me money? I still have to be
grateful, right? So,
I use up all my remaining merit on
building the house, and that merit is
no longer there to protect me
while I live in the house,
so I often encounter unexpected things.
We explain this according to
my current merit and my remaining merit. Do
you see? What about
other people? They work
hard, they have money to build a house, and after building the house,
they don't have to pay any debt. That
person's merit is what matters.  We already have the blessings, and the
karmic consequences are still ongoing,
meaning the old blessings remain,
so people won't encounter many
unusual things. If you understand
this point, the blessings and karmic consequences are
n't yet clear. But when we have to borrow, ask for, show
gratitude,
and repay kindness later, then
the remaining blessings for
building this house are
depleted. Because they are depleted, they can't protect
us from peace and well-being.
But rich people build houses
easily, while poor people find it difficult. If you do
n't borrow and keep saving money, when will you ever be able to
build a house? If you
don't borrow now, when will you ever save? So,
having someone lend you money is good.
Now, let's solve the problem of
borrowing money from others to
build a house so that we don't
encounter those obstacles. That's a
problem we can
solve using Buddhist teachings. So
when we build that house...  So we
must have intention, that is, we must have a purpose. My
parents gave me this much money to build this house. I have
vowed to repay them for this money they gave me. I will also repay them
during my work. I will try my
best to
repay them. Is
that a
good intention? But what about those who build houses? Parents
must give this to their children, saying it's
their money, they must share it with them to build a house. Is that
unwholesome? As I
've just explained, all
actions stemming from a good intention will
generate blessings to protect us. All
actions stemming from an
unwholesome intention will generate negative karma. Is
that right? Therefore, we only
need to adjust our minds. Buddhist practice is about cultivating the mind.
We only need to adjust our minds,
dear fellow practitioners. If our parents
give us money to build a house,
we must be grateful to them. If they
give a lot, we benefit a lot; if they
give little...  I've received little, so I must
speak from the heart.
I have parents, so I can't have
this house. Without them, I couldn't have
built it. Therefore, this house is
partly my parents' property. So, parents, feel
free to do as you please. You must consider my house
as your own, right? And
in my heart, I must uphold
filial piety, which means serving my parents.
Never think that this is
money you deserve to keep. It's my
parents' hard work, not yours. My
parents gave birth to me and raised me with so much
effort. Now that I'm grown up, I want to
demand a share of their wealth.
I must discard that mindset,
and then I will receive blessings. That's the first blessing that
protects me. This blessing of filial piety
creates
many good things: a
happy marriage, well-behaved children, and
career success.
So, we must adjust our mindset
towards our parents when we build a house. Just
adjust your mindset, and you'll cultivate it.  That's right,
dear fellow practitioners. Even if the money is
earned through our own efforts, when we
build a house or acquire
something, we must be grateful to our parents. This
is due to our parents' karma and the blessings of
our ancestors. We must think this way, and naturally,
we will receive blessings to protect
us when we build our house.
See, dear fellow practitioners, isn't Buddhism wonderful?
The Buddha is a wise being; we learn from
Buddhism and find it very insightful. And
if we borrow from someone, we
must always be grateful. In our hearts, we
must think, "I will be indebted to this person. If they
are in difficulty, I will help them in return,
right?" If we don't have material things, we can do it through our
efforts. We must also tell
everyone, "That person helped me so much that
I now have a house to live in, and I am very
grateful." That means our hearts must be grateful,
dear fellow practitioners. If we borrow,
our hearts must be grateful.
This gratitude will give
rise to many acts of gratitude later on. That is,
when we think about it, we must repay the debt of gratitude.
We must help in this way; if we
have the means, we must repay them. With
such a mindset, you will
see that when we think like this,
the fruits of our good deeds will
come. Not only will our good actions
come, but
this very mindset is what is the karmic reward, the
blessing for us, because
these good deeds will all have
results for us, and we will
enjoy the blessings from now on. For example, imagine
someone is suffering greatly. If
you have money,
or even if you don't have money, if you
think that if you have the
means, you should give them some, even if
you don't have the karmic reward yet, it will still
arise in your heart. From that thought, the
karmic reward will arise in your heart, creating the
conditions that will allow you to develop.
The Buddha taught that the entire
universe is mind-only; the world and the living environment
around us are created by our minds.
This is about filial piety and
righteousness; when building a house, we must have
that mindset. Now, regarding
spirituality, the Buddha
taught this:
all the land on the great earth, all the
land on this planet,
contains the bones and flesh of living beings. All the land on the great earth contains the
bones and flesh of
living beings.
And why do I say that all the land on the
great earth contains the bones and flesh of living beings?
Because the place where we live now
has been inhabited thousands of years ago.
There is no place without living beings,
no
people, no things, so there are
living beings there who have died. Do you understand this, Venerable Ones?
Therefore, we don't need to
fear that the land where our house is located has a
cemetery; every place
has living beings who have died. The
Buddha also
taught that this realm is the realm where ordinary beings and saints coexist.
All living beings live
together. In the Buddha's teachings,
even just plants and grasses, from 20 centimeters tall, already contain them.  All
beings are taking refuge here, dear fellow practitioners.
Here, what beings are taking refuge? Are they spirits,
ghosts, or what do we
call them? Spirits, wandering souls,
lost souls, or even demons? So, what is the Buddhist way of
dealing with these beings that
share
our land, whether that land is a
cemetery we bought, land we bought from an
owner,
land we received as compensation, land that
was leveled, or any land at all?
We should keep in our hearts
that there are beings on this land,
and we share a karmic connection with them.
So why should we only
now begin the ritual of worship? We
must worship according to the
Dharma. In Buddhist teachings, when building temples or
clearing land
for temples, the Buddha taught the
monks and lay people that
before we go to any land
we want to live on, we must
at least ask permission.  Seven
days ago, we wanted to clear the land here.
We wanted to build and renovate here. We
ask that if any of you who
have lived here
before please give us this space. You
can move to another place.  I
will perform these meritorious deeds, this merit, that
merit, to dedicate the merit to you all. Because
I am a mortal, I cannot
see you all, but this land was either
subdivided or
sold to me by the previous owner, or I cleared and cultivated it
here. For us humans, that's all we
know. We simply do it like
that. Then we perform rituals,
offering them fruits, food, and
drinks. We offer them, and as
Buddhist disciples, we must pray for their
salvation. We give them that merit,
that karmic reward. Then, if we are not yet
Buddhists, we perform the rituals and
ask them to accept our offerings. After we
finish the rituals, we go home and light the incense in the
ancestral incense burner. In this ancestral incense burner,
we invite all the spirits who have a
connection to this land to come and
worship them. I call them by name, the
spirits of this land, and I ask them to
accept our heartfelt devotion. So, on the 15th and
1st of the lunar month, and on the anniversary of their passing...  After the twelfth lunar month, on the
fifteenth day of the third lunar month, I offer sacrifices to all the
spirits, considering them my relatives. Then,
when I'm tending the trees in the house, when
I'm building the house, I ask the spirits to reside there as they see fit and to
protect my family and grant us all
good things. Dear fellow practitioners, in the
sutra where the
Buddha taught about those born as
Yakshas, ​​the Buddha also
taught that this woman should set up an altar to worship
the Yaksha demon that follows
her and lives on earth. She should also give
it
food and drink every day so that it will bless her
house. That sutra is very
good. There are many good sutras here that
we apply to Buddhism for
our practice and dedication.
We should address all the spirits on earth, the spirits on earth, in this way.
Then we offer
food to them. When we build a house,
we usually perform rituals and offer food.
After lighting the incense,
we invite them to come
so they can see
our sincerity.  When traveling far or near, I
buy things, I offer incense to my ancestors, and
I also invite them. That way, they feel my
sincerity, and they become like
family. Before, they were
here and no one had offered them any sacrifices, right?
Now, when I go home and offer sacrifices for them, they are happy, aren't they? That's how it is. So,
from the perspective of
Buddhism, we should practice
kindness towards all the people who come
to us. This
creates merit for
those who help us, including the
construction workers who
come to build our house. Dear fellow
practitioners, we must treat them
very well, we must care
for
them. The Buddha taught that if you know how
to care for your workers, the business
will thrive. That's the Buddha's teaching
in the sutra: to become rich, you must
pay your workers,
and provide for them adequately. Many people
building houses sometimes try to take advantage
of the workers, deducting small amounts to make up for the difference.
We shouldn't say it's wrong. It
doesn't generate blessings, it generates negative
karma. Those with weak spiritual foundations will
hinder our work. Therefore, when
we have workers building a house, we must
make them happy. When they are happy, they
will build well for us.
Ideally, we should contract with them for 5000 square meters, for example.
When we
finish pouring the foundation, we reward them. Will they be
happy? We reward them as they work.
When we reward them, if they make a
mistake, we can easily correct it.
Therefore,
we must treat the workers very well.
Furthermore, when we are pouring the
foundation, roof, or anything else that affects the
neighboring house or the surrounding area,
we must have a
very good attitude. Many people
have very bad attitudes.
When we build our house, we
create negative impacts on the surrounding area, but if
we have a bad attitude, that
bad attitude will only hinder our work.
What creates what causes and
conditions to hinder one's desires?
My desire is that when I build a
house, I want my work to go
smoothly, everyone to be healthy, and the owner and
workers to be safe, right? Then, when
I move into this new house, I want my
husband and I to be happy, my children to be joyful and harmonious, everything to go smoothly, and all things auspicious. I
want all of that when I build a house. So, I must
create all the causes and conditions
related to myself. I must start from a
good heart and practice
good deeds. In the
process of doing so, I have created
merit, haven't I? Will
merit be generated? It will be generated. When merit is generated, it
's like someone going on a
trip; they have a plane ticket, and then they
generate expenses for their
spending, right? They go on a trip, and then they
bring some
goods to sell, so they generate
profit.
That's so great!  Or it's
like that pilgrimage trip
of the Buddhists in the Golden Cup Club.
We went on a pilgrimage, and we
used our old merits to go on the
pilgrimage. During the
pilgrimage, we also brought
some
instant noodles and some sweets, giving alms along the way. So we used up our
old merits, but we also knew how to create
new merits, so everyone returned happy, right?
Everyone was
happy. That's a good thing, dear fellow
practitioners. So the issue here is that
we must think about merit and karma,
not about the direction of the
house, the age of the house, or
feng shui. Therefore, practicing
Buddhism means we go into the Right Principle,
into the truth of the matter, and we will be at
peace. So when we build a house, we should think
about our parents, right?
Even if our parents don't give us money,
we should still think about
the merits they gave us, the body we
were born with, the conditions
we had to eat and study, and the path they helped us take.
Good fortune in work allows us to earn
money. Therefore, we must be grateful to
our parents, because with this kind heart, it
will protect us so that after building the house, it will
be auspicious. Even those who
always live with this kind heart will
create many opportunities for
advancement in their careers. We don't need to worry about anything;
what we need to worry about is creating
merit for ourselves, cultivating this kind heart to
develop a good heart, eliminating
bad thoughts, and we will always
have blessings. Building a house will only bring peace and
prosperity, without worrying about misfortune.
That's all, dear fellow practitioners. Respectfully, dear fellow practitioners
and friends, I, Han Quan,
share with you the
Buddhist perspective on what
needs to be prepared before building a house:
preparing a kind heart and good deeds
for all the opportunities that arise when building a house. And I
wish you all, especially those who have sent questions here, success in building your house and your
work.  May all circumstances be auspicious
and after building the house, everything
will progress smoothly, bringing happiness, peace, and
joy to the family. Farewell,
dear fellow practitioners, and I look forward to meeting you again in the
future to answer any questions or concerns. Namo Buddha Shakyamuni
[music]
Ni I